Migration guide 1.1.5 to 1.2.0 (#364)
ably/ably-go: UPDATING.md

In this guide we aim to highlight the main differences you will encounter when migrating your code from the interfaces we were offering prior to the [version 1.2.0 release](https://github.com/ably/ably-go/releases/tag/v1.2.0).

These include:

- Changes to numerous function and method signatures - these are breaking changes, in that your code will need to change to use them in their new form
- Adoption of the [Context Concurrency Pattern](https://blog.golang.org/context) using the [context package](https://pkg.go.dev/context) - e.g. [ably.RealtimeChannel.Subscribe](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#RealtimeChannel.Subscribe)
- Adoption of the [Functional Options Pattern](https://dave.cheney.net/2014/10/17/functional-options-for-friendly-apis) - e.g. [ably.ClientOption](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#ClientOption)

### Asynchronous Operations and the `Context` Concurrency Pattern

We've now moved to a model where methods are blocking in nature, cancellable with a [Context](https://pkg.go.dev/context#Context).

We use `ctx` in examples to refer to a `Context` instance that you create in your code.

> For robust, production ready applications you will rarely (actually, probably _never_) want to create your `Context` using the basic [Background](https://pkg.go.dev/context#Background) function, given it cannot be cancelled and remains for the lifecycle of the program. Instead, you should use [WithTimeout](https://pkg.go.dev/context#WithTimeout) or [WithDeadline](https://pkg.go.dev/context#WithDeadline).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For robust, production-ready applications you will rarely (actually, probably _never_) want to create your `Context` using the basic [Background](https://pkg.go.dev/context#Background) function, because it cannot be cancelled and remains for the lifecycle of the program. Instead, you should use [WithTimeout](https://pkg.go.dev/context#WithTimeout) or [WithDeadline](https://pkg.go.dev/context#WithDeadline).
```

> For example, a context can be created with a 10 second timeout like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a context can be created with a 10-second timeout like this:
```

```go

> context.WithTimeout(context.Background, 10 * time.Second)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
context.WithTimeout(context.Background(), 10 * time.Second)
```

My bad, I shared an incorrect snippet for this, typing off the top of my head.

Author: Ooh, thanks. I should have spotted that. I'll admit I didn't try running this code. I'll fix this.

Author: Fixed: https://github.com/ably/ably-go/pull/364/commits/d6a9c8f08642cb9826ddef0a6e81c3450d4e03c8

```

Adding the necessary code to stay on top of cancellation, you will need something like this:

```go
ctx, cancelFunc := context.WithTimeout(context.Background(), 10 * time.Second)
defer cancelFunc()
```

This way, the context can be cancelled at the close of the function.

### Client Options now has a Functional Interface

> Previously you _were_ instantiating a client using a `ClientOptions` instance created using the `NewClientOptions` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before version 1.2.0, you instantiated a client using a `ClientOptions` instance created with the `NewClientOptions` function:
```

```go
client, err := ably.NewRealtime(ably.NewClientOptions("xxx:xxx"))
```

> You **now** need to use the new functional interface:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Starting with version 1.2.0**, you must use the new functional interface:
```

```go
client, err := ably.NewRealtime(ably.WithKey("xxx:xxx"))
```

> Methods on `ClientOptions`

Reviewer 3: This sentence seems incomplete. Perhaps:

For a full list of client options, see [all functions prefixed `With` that return `ClientOption`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go@v1.2.0/ably#ClientOption).

Author: Oh, sorry about that, you're absolutely right. I was intending to link out to where the other options could be found, perhaps even going as far as to map spec'd concepts to the Go equivalents. I shall revisit.

Author: Fixed: https://github.com/ably/ably-go/pull/364/commits/5c39e03cfd1689f5986081664aeb618479153fa2

### Subscription now uses Message Handlers

> Previously you _were_ receiving all messages from a Go Channel using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before version 1.2.0, you subscribed to receive all messages from a Go channel like this:
```

```go
sub, _ := channel.Subscribe()
for msg := range sub.MessageChannel() {
    fmt.Println("Received message: ", msg)
}
```

> You **now** need to supply a context and your own message handler function to the new [SubscribeAll](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#RealtimeChannel.SubscribeAll) method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Starting with version 1.2.0**, you must supply a context and your own message handler function to the new [SubscribeAll](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#RealtimeChannel.SubscribeAll) method:
```

```go
unsubscribe, _ := channel.SubscribeAll(ctx, func(msg *ably.Message) {
    fmt.Println("Received message: ", msg)
})
```

> The signature of the [Subscribe](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#RealtimeChannel.Subscribe) method has also changed, now requiring a [Context](https://pkg.go.dev/context#Context) as well as channel name and your message handler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The signature of the [Subscribe](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#RealtimeChannel.Subscribe) method has also changed. It now requires a [Context](https://pkg.go.dev/context#Context) as well as the channel name and your message handler.
```

Both `Subscribe` and `SubscribeAll` are now blocking methods.

### The `Publish` Method now Blocks

> Previously you _were_ publishing messages to a channel by calling `Publish` and then waiting on the `Result`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before version 1.2.0, you published messages to a channel by calling the `Publish` method and then waiting for the `Result`:
```

```go
result, _ := channel.Publish("EventName1", "EventData1")

// block until the publish operation completes
result.Wait()
```

> You **now** need to supply a context, as this method is now blocking:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Starting with version 1.2.0**, you must supply a context, as this method is now blocking:
```

```go
// block until the publish operation completes or is cancelled
channel.Publish(ctx, "EventName1", "EventData1")
```

### Querying History

> Previously you were _were_ using something like this, receiving a `PaginatedResult` from the `History` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before version 1.2.0, you queried history as shown below, receiving a `PaginatedResult` from the `History` function:
```

```go
page, err := channel.History(nil)
for ; err == nil; page, err = page.Next() {
    for _, message := range page.Messages() {
        fmt.Println("Message from History: ", message)
    }
}
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
```

> You **now** need to use the blocking [Pages](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#HistoryRequest.Pages) method on the returned `HistoryRequest` instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Starting with version 1.2.0**, you must use the blocking [Pages](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#HistoryRequest.Pages) method on the returned `HistoryRequest` instance:
```

# Upgrade / Migration Guide

## Version 1.1.5 to 1.2.0

We have made many **breaking changes** in the version 1.2 release of this SDK.

In this guide we aim to highlight the main differences you will encounter when migrating your code from the interfaces we were offering prior to the [version 1.2.0 release](https://github.com/ably/ably-go/releases/tag/v1.2.0).

These include:

- Changes to numerous function and method signatures - these are breaking changes, in that your code will need to change to use them in their new form
- Adoption of the [Context Concurrency Pattern](https://blog.golang.org/context) using the [context package](https://pkg.go.dev/context) - e.g. [ably.RealtimeChannel.Subscribe](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#RealtimeChannel.Subscribe)
- Adoption of the [Functional Options Pattern](https://dave.cheney.net/2014/10/17/functional-options-for-friendly-apis) - e.g. [ably.ClientOption](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#ClientOption)

### Asynchronous Operations and the `Context` Concurrency Pattern

> We've now moved to a model where methods are blocking in nature, cancellable with a [Context](https://pkg.go.dev/context#Context).

Author: https://github.com/ably/ably-go/pull/364/commits/07f63ef1164ec4d20d4dc26dcb5fb878426f2ed2

We use `ctx` in examples to refer to a `Context` instance that you create in your code.

> For robust, production-ready applications you will rarely (actually, probably _never_) want to create your `Context` using the basic [Background](https://pkg.go.dev/context#Background) function, because it cannot be cancelled and remains for the lifecycle of the program. Instead, you should use [WithTimeout](https://pkg.go.dev/context#WithTimeout) or [WithDeadline](https://pkg.go.dev/context#WithDeadline).

Reviewer 4: Given my comment above, this is probably a bit misleading in the context of Realtime. The SDK has has its own timeout handling built in, as required by the spec and Realtime protocol.

Also, I'm not sure we should be explaining what contexts are for at all. They've been in common use for years, and are thoroughly documented elsewhere.

Author: That is a very good point and I understand what you are saying regarding timeouts. I'm going to see what words I can find to clarify this as it's worth highlighting.

I disagree, however, when it comes to the validity of explaining contexts. I tried to keep it as abstract as possible, but there will be developers from all levels approaching this documentation, so I believe this is a relevant expansion - especially given how core the adoption of this pattern is to the changes in 1.2.0.

Author: https://github.com/ably/ably-go/pull/364/commits/07f63ef1164ec4d20d4dc26dcb5fb878426f2ed2

For example, a context can be created with a 10-second timeout like this:

```go
context.WithTimeout(context.Background(), 10 * time.Second)
```

Adding the necessary code to stay on top of cancellation, you will need something like this:

```go

> ctx, cancelFunc := context.WithTimeout(context.Background(), 10 * time.Second)

Reviewer 4: Tiny detail but this function is pretty much always called just `cancel`. Generally, idiomatic Go avoids Hungarian notation.

Author: https://github.com/ably/ably-go/pull/364/commits/e1a229cdf85b949580432125480cece651faee43

defer cancelFunc()
```

This way, the context can be cancelled at the close of the function.

### Client Options now has a Functional Interface

Before version 1.2.0, you instantiated a client using a `ClientOptions` instance created with the `NewClientOptions` function:

```go
client, err := ably.NewRealtime(ably.NewClientOptions("xxx:xxx"))
```

**Starting with version 1.2.0**, you must use the new functional interface:

```go
client, err := ably.NewRealtime(ably.WithKey("xxx:xxx"))
```

For a full list of client options, see all functions prefixed by `With` that return a `ClientOption` function
[in the API reference](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#ClientOption).

### Subscription now uses Message Handlers

Before version 1.2.0, you subscribed to receive all messages from a Go channel like this:

```go
sub, _ := channel.Subscribe()
for msg := range sub.MessageChannel() {
    fmt.Println("Received message: ", msg)
}
```

> **Starting with version 1.2.0**, you must supply a context and your own message handler function to the new [SubscribeAll](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#RealtimeChannel.SubscribeAll) method:

Reviewer 4: It may be worth mentioning that the fine concurrency aspects of message handlers, and more generally of event emitters, is described separately [in the docs](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go@v1.2.0/ably#hdr-Event_Emitters).

Reviewer 4: Reviewing this, I realized the docs weren't very good. Tried to fix that at #365.

Author: https://github.com/ably/ably-go/pull/364/commits/24c47971aea53f182419954b1e4a359e2b8cfe3a

```go
unsubscribe, _ := channel.SubscribeAll(ctx, func(msg *ably.Message) {
    fmt.Println("Received message: ", msg)
})
```

The signature of the [Subscribe](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#RealtimeChannel.Subscribe) method has also changed. It now requires a [Context](https://pkg.go.dev/context#Context) as well as the channel name and your message handler.

Both `Subscribe` and `SubscribeAll` are now blocking methods.

> ### The `Publish` Method now Blocks

Reviewer 4: This is true of all methods that previously returned a Result, not just Publish.

Author: Sure, but I think it's worth highlighting boldly for this specific section of the guide. Especially for readers who perhaps jump straight to this section.

Before version 1.2.0, you published messages to a channel by calling the `Publish` method and then waiting for the `Result`:

```go
result, _ := channel.Publish("EventName1", "EventData1")

// block until the publish operation completes
result.Wait()
```

**Starting with version 1.2.0**, you must supply a context, as this method is now blocking:

```go
// block until the publish operation completes or is cancelled

> channel.Publish(ctx, "EventName1", "EventData1")

Reviewer 4: I know this is just a snippet and errors are not the point, but I'd include them. People sometimes just copy and paste from examples without giving it much thought.

Also, this way the whole API is succinctly shown.

```suggestion
err := channel.Publish(ctx, "EventName1", "EventData1")
```

Author: A fair comment and in this case I think it adds value. Thanks.

In other cases I've used underscore `_`, which should be hint enough to a developer to look into what should be there.

```

### Querying History

Before version 1.2.0, you queried history as shown below, receiving a `PaginatedResult` from the `History` function:

```go
page, err := channel.History(nil)
for ; err == nil; page, err = page.Next() {
    for _, message := range page.Messages() {
        fmt.Println("Message from History: ", message)
    }
}
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
```

> **Starting with version 1.2.0**, you must use the blocking [Pages](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/ably/ably-go/ably#HistoryRequest.Pages) method on the returned `HistoryRequest` instance:

Reviewer 4: It was also blocking before.

It may be worth mentioning that History now takes functional options, instead of a Params struct.
